---

Making Sense of SQL: DDL, DML, and the Language of Databases
A product professional's first encounter with Structured Query Language and what it all means.
Coming from a product background, I had heard of SQL many times, in conversations about data pipelines, analytics dashboards, and backend systems. This week, I finally met it face to face. Here is what I have learned.

---

What is SQL, and why does structure matter?
SQL (Structured Query Language) is the standard language used to communicate with relational databases. A relational database stores information in tables : rows and columns, much like a spreadsheet , but with strict rules about data types, relationships, and how data is entered or retrieved.
Within SQL, two major categories govern what you can do: DDL and DML.
DDL - Data Definition Language
Defines the structure of the database which is the blueprint before any data goes in.
They include : create , alter, drop and truncate
DML - Data Manipulation Language
Manipulates the data inside the structure by adding values, changing values , and removing them.
They include: insert, update, delete and select
The main difference is that DDL changes the shape of the database; DML changes the content.
Commands Terms Deep dive;
CREATE TABLE
This command defines a new table with column names, data types, and constraints.

create table students(
student_id INT primary key,
first_name VARCHAR(50) not null,
last_name VARCHAR(50) not null,
gender VARCHAR(1)not null,
date_of_birth DATE ,
class VARCHAR(10),
city VARCHAR(50) );
The table above will contain column such as student_id, first_name…etc
2. INSERT - adding a row or
This command allows us to add data to the created table
insert into students (student_id,first_name,last_name, gender,date_of_birth,class,city)
values 
(1, 'Amina', 'Wanjiku','F','2008-03-12','Form 3','Nairobi');
Column names must match the values in the same order. SQL does not accept spaces in names, so column names use underscores.
3. UPDATE - changing existing data
Modifies a record/data that already exists. Always use a WHERE clause so as to limit the value that you need to modify or else every row in the table gets changed.
update students 
set city= 'Nairobi'
where student_id=5;

- Command will only update the city location for student with id =5
4. DELETE 
Removes one or more rows. Like UPDATE, a missing WHERE clause deletes everything, so it must always be included.
DELETE FROM results WHERE result_id = 1;

-This command will change results related to result_id=1
Understanding Data Types
When creating a table, every column must be assigned a data type. This tells SQL exactly what kind of information that column will hold , and it enforces that rule on every row inserted. Choosing the right data type keeps your data clean, consistent, and efficient to query.
NUMERIC
For numeric values;
- INT- Whole numbers. No decimals. Good for IDs, counts, scores.
- marks INT
- SERIAL- Auto-incrementing integer. SQL assigns the next number automatically.
- id SERIAL
- DECIMAL- Numbers with decimal points. Used for prices or precise values.
- price DECIMAL(8,2)
TEXT 
These are strictly used for text values.Theyinclude;
VARCHAR(n)- Variable-length text up to n characters. The most common text type. VARCHAR(2)- 
CHAR(n)- Fixed-length text. Always occupies exactly n characters, padded if shorter. CHAR(3)-only 2 characters
BOOLEAN
True or false only. Useful for flags like is_active or is_paid. is_active

---

Filtering with WHERE
The WHERE clause narrows down which rows a query affects. Several operators make filtering precise and powerful:
=exact match

select * from students 
where gender= 'F';

- shows female students
2. >greater than
3. <less than
4. BETWEEN- range (inclusive)
 select subject_id,exam_date
from exam_results
where exam_date between '2024-03-15' and '2024-03-18';

exams that took place between 15th and 18th March 2024
5. IN-list of values
select student_id, first_name,city
from students
where city in ('Nairobi','Mombasa','Kisumu');

- shows students who live in Nairobi, Mombasa and Kisumu
6. LIKE- pattern matching
select *from subjects
where subject_name like '%Studies%';

shows subjects that contain 'Studies'

---

d results for specific subjects SELECT * FROM results WHERE subject_id IN (1, 3, 5); - LIKE: find grades starting with 'A' (A, A+, A-) SELECT * FROM results WHERE grade LIKE 'A%';

---

Transforming data with CASE WHEN
CASE WHEN is SQL's if/else logic , it reads a value and returns a label without changing the underlying table. 
For example:
SELECT student_id, marks, CASE WHEN marks >= 70 THEN 'Distinction' WHEN marks >= 50 THEN 'Pass' ELSE 'Fail' END AS performance FROM results;
The result is a new derived column called performance that appears only in the query output - the original marks column in the table stays untouched. This makes CASE WHEN very useful for reporting and segmentation.
select 
result_id,
student_id
marks,
case 
 when marks >=80 then 'Distinction'
  when marks >=60 then 'Merit'
   when marks >=40 then 'Pass'
else 'Fail'
end as perfomance
from exam_results;

---

Reflection: what this week felt like
The most challenging part was internalizing the order of operations, understanding that you cannot insert data before the table exists, and that every UPDATE or DELETE without a WHERE clause is a silent disaster waiting to happen. SQL does exactly what you tell it, nothing more.What I found genuinely interesting was how readable the language is. Keywords like SELECT, FROM, WHERE, and INSERT INTO almost read like plain instructions , yet behind them lies a precise, powerful system.
The CASE WHEN statement was a highlight, it felt like the moment SQL stopped being just a retrieval tool and became an analytical one. Turning raw marks into performance labels with a few lines of logic is exactly the kind of insight I used to rely on others to produce. Now I can do it myself.